Hi everyone, this lecture is about writing
classes and methods in R.
The basic idea of writing classes and
methods in R, is that
you want to represent new kinds of data,
or new data types.
That R doesn't kind of you know, by
default support.
So for example you can think of a basic
data type, like a list.
This is this, this is kind of inherent to
R.
There's all kinds of functions and kind of
processes that you can do
to lists that gets all kind of built in
that kind of comes with R.
But if you can imagine thinking of a new
data type.
For example, a new field emerges and they
come up with their own data.
This is not something that the original
designers of R could have foreseen.
And so, you need to develop a new
structure to support that data,
a new set of functions to kind of apply to
that kind of data type.
And so, that's what the idea behind
writing classes and methods in R is.
So any time something new comes up, the R
system can adapt.
And kind of support new types of data and
new data structures.
So that's what we're going to talk about
in this lecture.
The classes and methods system in R
is basically a system for doing
object-oriented programming.
And years ago when R was first coming out
it was quite an interesting language.
Because it was both an interactive system
that
supported a kind of formal system for
object orientation.
And so, many other languages at the time
and things
like, things that had kind of
well known object orientated programming
infrastructure.
Like C++ and Java were generally not
considered interactive languages.
Those are the kind of languages where you
write programs,
you compile them and then you could run
them.
And not the kind of thing where you type
things in the command
line and execute things one at a time like
you do in R.
So a lot of the R code, a lot of the code
in R
for supporting devel, the development of
classes
and methods was written by John Chambers
himself.
So he was the creator of S and has written
a lot of code in the R system.
And so the basic ideas are documented in
his book Programming with Data.
And so, the idea behind the class and
methods system in R is to
kind of allow people to cross over from
being a user to being a programmer.
And you recall from the basic overview of
the R
language that we talked about in the R
programming class.
John Chambers original idea for the, for
the S language was that people would
start off as users and slowly as they
became more familiar with the language.
They would cross over and become
programmers as
they tried to customize the system for
themselves.
So R has a var-, the sa-, the basic same,
the same basic philosophy.
Whereas that people could start off, users
can have executing functions and then
as their needs grow a-, and as their needs
kind of outgrow the R system.
They could become programmers and develop
new things in R.
And that's the basis of classes and
methods.
So object oriented programming is a little
bit different
in R than it is most of the languages.
So if, if you're familiar with the
language, like C++ or Java.
There's document that is helpful, but some
of the
ideas in R are a little bit different so.
It's used.
And you might want to pay, pay attention
to some of the details here.
So in R there are basically two styles of
classes and methods.
And this is a function of kind of
historical development there's kind of
an older style, and the, the new, there's
a newer style.
So sometimes we'll see the older styles
referred to as S3 classes and methods.
So that corresponds with version three of
the S
language and these classes and methods
are, are informal.
They'are a little kludgy and they're
kind of not very formally rigorous.
But they get the job done and they work
quite well.
And a lot of the basic functions that you
use
in R, are kind of built on S3 classes and
methods.
So we know that they are really quite
useful.
And so, and they're not going away anytime
soon.
But the more formal and rigorous system
for writing classes
and methods is called, usually referred to
as the S4 system.
And the became, because it came with the
version 4 of the S language.
It was introduced into R at version 1.4.0,
which was in December 2001.
And these are sometimes called new styled
classes and methods.
And for new projects, it's generally
encouraged, for for
people to kind of use the S4 classes or
methods.
If they're going to be developing new
types of classes and methods.
So, these two systems for the foreseeable
future will be living side, by side.
Just because of the sort of history of R
and a
lot of the kind of built in functionality
that's written in S3.
But the S3 and S4 systems are separate in
the sense that
you don't typically mix then together as
you are programming new things.
So the systems are fairly independent of
each other.
And so developers are encouraged to use
the S4 style classes
in methods that use extensively for
example in the bio-conductor project.
But the S3 classes and methods are
sometimes
useful because they are very quick and
dirty.
They are a little bit easier to program.
And for short term types of projects you
may, it may be tempting
to kind of build up some S3 classes and
methods in the first go.
But for the most part we'll focus on S4.
I'll talk a little bit about the S3 system
just so you're familiar with it.
But I'll talk mostly about developing in
the S4 system.
So one thing that's important to know is
that all of the
implementation of the object orient method
in the S4 classes and methods.
Is implemented in the methods package.
The methods packaged is usually loaded by
default.
So if you just start up R from a
clean installation the methods package
will usually be loaded.
But if it's not, you can always load it
with the library function by calling the
library methods.
So the basic idea this, in object oriented
programming R is
that you have classes and methods as you
may have guessed already.
So a class is basically a description of
some thing, right?
And the thing will usually be some new
thing like a new data type or a new idea.
And a class can be defined using the set
class method in the methods package.
And then you have objects which are
instances of that classes.
And objects can be created using the new
function or
are often there can be created using other
types of functions.
So a method is a function that operates
on certain class on a certain class of
objects.
And so, methods are functions that are
specific to certain classes.
And then finally you have a generic
function,
which is an R function that dispatches
methods.
So generic function is usually it tries to
encapsulate a generic kind of
concept, and we'll see a few of these a
little bit later.
For example, the plot function is probably
one of the most used generic functions.
And the plot functions, plotting is a
fairly generic concept.
And what, how you make a plot may depend
on the kind of data that you're plotting.
And so there are many different plotting
methods
that can be applied to different data
types.
And the plots function jobs it to, to look
at the
data types and, and dispatch specific
methods on those different data types.
So generic functions do not actually do
anything.
They don't do any computation, they don't
do an sort of work.
Their main job is to dispatch methods, and
we'll
talk about what that means more
specifically in a second.
And so, a method is the implementation of
a
generic function for an object of a
particular class.
So the basic concepts are class, object,
method, and generic function here.
So, as you're working your way through
the, learning this system, there are
a number of help files in the methods
package that may come in handy.
so, the primary documentation are in the
help files.
So you can look at the classes and methods
help pages.
You can also look at help pages for
?setClass, ?setMethod, and ?setGeneric.
Some of this gets very technical so you
may want to skim through it right now.
But, as you learn the system, it will make
more sense in the future.
So every object and R has a class, and the
class of that object can be determined
with the class function.
I just take the number one here.
You may recall an R the numbers by
default are kind of real numbers or double
precision numbers.
And so, there considered a numeric class,
and so that's what you see here.
Illogicals have there own class there true
and false are logicals.
If you generate some random numbers, those
are numeric that again is a numeric
vector.
The missing value NA is by default a
logical, but you
can have missing kind of of a numeric unit
missing integer etcetera.
And then this a character string will have
in the class of characters.
So that's all fairly straightforward.
These are kind of atomic classes.
But you can go beyond the atomic classes.
For example, I could fit a linear model.
And the output from the lm function is an
lm class.
So if you think about it, the output from
fitting a linear
model is not what you would think of as a
standard data type.
Like numeric or integer or character but
it is a data type.
There are certain ideas that are kind of
encapsulated
in, from the output of a linear model.
If you are familiar with statistics.
And so and so it may deserve its own data
type.
And so therefore we call it the lm data
type, or data, or class.
So that, that's the idea behind classes in
R.
So generics and methods are the, these
types of functions that
you'll, you'll write to implement
functionality for certain types of
classes.
An S4 and S3 generic functions will
look different but they are conceptually
the same.
They play the same role.
And so when you can when you program you
can write meth-, new methods for an
existing generics.
So there may be a generic like plot that's
already out there.
And then you'll write a new method for a
new type of data.
But there may be new generics that you
create.
So you may create a new generic function
for doing a new operation.
And then, you'll have to write the generic
and the method for a given data type.
Here are a few generic functions.
These are S3 generic functions.
And so these are probably functions that
you've seen already.
The mean is a generic function.
Print is a generic function.
And so you see when I print out these
functions, there's not there's almost no
code associated with them.
The only code that comes out of the mean
function is this use method mean.
And similarly for the print function, the
generic
function, the all you see is use method
print.
And so, the basic idea is that, these
generic functions, there job is
to find an appropriate method for whatever
data type is being passed to them.
So you can see what methods are available,
for
the mean generic function, by calling the
methods function.
And you can see there's a mean function
for dates.
There's a, [UNKNOWN] there's a default
method.
And there's one for div time, Posixct and
Posixlt.
Now as you add as you kind of load
packages into
the R environment, those packages may add
methods for the means.
So, as you kind of load packages
throughout your work in R, this set
of methods that are available to the mean
function may change over time.
And so, this list can grow as you add more
packages.
So, here's an example of an S4 generic
function so this is from the methods
package.
It's called show, and it's the equivalent
of print, but it's the S4 version.
And you see there's a lot more stuff that
gets printed out when
you, when you, when you print out the body
of the show function.
The base, the basic idea's the same.
The, the code for show is the standard
generic.
And then show and based, and it just tries
to
identify the class of the object that's
being passed to it.
And then it will dispatch the appropriate
method.
And so, most of the time in R you
don't call the Show function or the Print
function.
Because most, because objects will be auto
printed at the command line.
So here you can see what methods
are associated with the show, generic
function.
And you can see that this these are, there
are number of methods here
one is for these are all in the methods
package, that you can see.
There is one for the in ref class, is
one for functions, is one for generic
functions etc,.
So all these different types of objects
have a special print method or show
method.
So, the basic mechanism by which generic
functions and
methods interact with each other is, goes
as follows.
So, the first argument for any generic
function is an object of a particular
class.
All right?
There may be other arguments but the first
object is important.
Sorry, the first argument is important.
And so the way the process works, is that
the generic function will check the class
of that object.
So it will try to identify the class.
It will do, the generic function will
essentially do a search
to see if there's a method that is
specific for that class.
If there is a method for that class, then
it will call
the method of that object, and then the
generic functions job is done.
The method will do the rest of the work.
If there is no method for that class Then
the
generic will search, will see if there's a
default method.
So a kind of catch all method that always
gets applied
if there's no other kind of more specific
type of method.
If there'a default method, then the
default method
is called and then it does all the work.
If there's no default method, then,
there's an error.
Because the generic function doesn't know
what to call, and
there's no default method so, it can't do
anything by itself.
so, a lot of times you may want to look at
the code for methods.
But it's important to note that it's
generally not
possible to, kind of, print the code of a
method function.
Just like you might print the code of any
other function.
So some functions that are not generics or
methods.
You can just type the name of the function
in the command line and
you, you'll see the body of the function
when you look at the code.
That's not always the case with S3 or S4
methods.
And so, the appropriate way to look at the
code or method
is to use either the get S3 method or the
get method function.
So get S3 method is for gen,ge,gen S3
generics, I'm sorry methods.
And the get method function is for S4.
And the basic idea, is you pass this
function.
The first argument is the name of the
generic.
And the second argument is the is the
class of the object.